---
layout: post
title:  "Chills from Chosen"
date:   2015-05-23 
categories: misc
---
It seems my life has reached a point where being stuck inside the house has driven me to go on a binge-watch rampage of shows set in impossible universes. Although, Crackle's original series <i>Chosen</i> might be a little too close to reality for comfort. A recent study conducted at Princeton indicated that American society is becoming less of a democracy and more of an oligarchy. This promptly set me into a state of panic, as all sorts of evil deeds done by rich people flooded my mind. <br>
<br>
BEWARE: SPOILERS AHEAD! Do not read further if you have not yet binge-watched all 3 seasons of <i>Chosen</i>! (Each episode is only about 20 minutes long so don't act like you have all that much self-control.) <br>
<br>
So why do rich people with excessive power on their hands steal my sleep? Well, the answer is put perfectly in the worst case scenario that is the premise of <i>Chosen</i>. A bunch of rich people, because they've already seen everything there is to see, tasted everything there is to taste, and done everything there is to be done, decide to create an exclusive club called The Watchers that consists of wealthy psychopaths. Little is known about The Watchers as they are elusive throughout the entire plot so far, except appearing in two scenes, both in which to show off the extent of their influence. Basically, The Watchers, for pure entertainment, put random people of the public masses in morally compromising situations that almost always turn each selected victim into a killer. <br>
With surveillance cameras set up everywhere, the chosen people are each forced to kill a target identified by a photo and 3-day expiration date given to them along with a gun in a box inscribed with the former's name, or see a loved one die, in a <i>The Hunger Games</i> style race. The terrible twist is that once they are in, they cannot get out. They have to keep killing targets as long as The Watchers have the chosen's loved ones to use as leverage. Only those of the chosen who have really impressed The Watchers, i.e. become master murderers, have the chance to escape the torturous game. To do this, a chosen one must kill 3 targets in 2 days to receive the "black box", the final train out of the wreck the chosen one's life has become at that point, that carries a wild card target -- possibly even a loved one himself/herself -- with anything from a few hours to a good number of days to complete the job. <br>
Now you might think, why doesn't a chosen one just refuse to play the game? Well, the diabolical Watchers have thought through their sick plans thoroughly. Whoever is a player in the game is <i>also</i> a target. In addition to the stress from having a loved one kidnapped and from bringing themselves to kill an innocent, there is another chosen one coming after them in order to protect <i>their</i> own. This is how The Watchers push the chosen to turn against each other by blurring the lines between right and wrong. In fact, The Watchers have such limitless power that they have even hired people in the police force, emergency services, and law firms, known as the Fixers, to clean up any trace of the game that ends up visible to others not in the game. There is pretty much <i>nothing</i> that can stop these Watchers, and that scares the living daylights out of me. <br>
Then comes the question, how the heck does one come to binge-watch terrors of this sort? Well, when you get to know the protagonists a little better, you start to sympathise with their side of the story, and soon, you find yourself rooting for them, even though they obviously have to straight-up murder an innocent in the end. Season 1 mostly explores the decision to kill itself. This is, of course, quite apt, as the show must begin by being able to make viewers picture themselves in similar situations and struggle right along in losing either their morality or their loved one. The Mitchell family gets the spotlight for this battle and ultimately decides to save their daughter rather than a stranger -- a choice most people would have made. <br>
Now that it is apparent that seemingly good people <i>will</i> kill if a loved one is in danger, viewers should be slightly desensitised against the act of killing itself. This sets the stage for season 2, which introduces a new protagonist, Jacob Orr, with whom one instantly sympathises upon learning that he has a crippled younger brother for whom he is the sole caretaker. Meanwhile, the Mitchell family attempts to run from the game by hiding away in an isolated cabin site. Jacob is thrown, like anybody else, right into the middle of the game -- one day, he finds the box and soon after has somebody trying to gun him down. Confused as expected, he investigates the best he can, only to end up being poisoned by his own target, a Leslie Brewer, who is actually a veteran in the game with enough skill to find his pursuer before the latter offs him. However, Jacob manages to get the upper hand and, in trying to protect his brother and his lady friend Avery, kills Leslie right there in his apartment. <br>
As awful as it is, we now know that there are people in the game who have been murdering for years to the point that they no longer feel remorse. Because Leslie appeared to have been a psychopath regardless, Jacob was able to come to terms with the fact that he had just murdered someone. Following the reception of his next box -- the entire Mitchell family -- he refuses to keep playing the game, which is basically an invitation for The Watchers to kidnap his brother in order to prod him along. After it is revealed that it was his close friend Max, the wealthy head of Gregory Industries providing the surveillance equipment to the Watchers in exchange for being allowed to watch the footage, who entered him into the game, Jacob meets with him and decides to go ahead with the kill in order to get his brother back. Fortunately and unfortunately, after shooting both parents, he cannot bring himself to shoot the 7-year-old daughter, Ellie. Jacob's brother dies as a result in the hands of the Watchers, concluding the season. <br>
Season 3 starts off with Jacob slowly gaining the trust of Ellie and taking her under his wing, and we are introduced to another protagonist, Josie Acosta, who is an elaboration on those of the chosen who have been killing for quite a while. At first, it seems Josie is a cold and calculating woman who enjoys the physical act of hunting down her targets, but one finds oneself eventually siding with her as she is fiercely protective as a single mother of two teenage kids, who she has trained to fight and to defend themselves. As fate (or the producers) would have it, her next target is Jacob. <br>
The Watchers decide to throw in another curveball and enter Max into the game, even though Max had been assuming the whole time, because he watched with them on the surveillance equipment he himself provided, that he was one of them. As I feel the betrayal Max experiences in kind, I also can't help but wonder if Max is perhaps not psychopath enough to gain membership into the Watchers. While we do get a glimpse of his dark nature in the scene where he coerced a prostitute to almost drown her companion, and he did encourage the Watchers' schemes by lending them his surveillance tech, he does have ties to Jacob as the latter's close friend and he does hesitate before attempting to kill Ellie (his designated target). However, it still goes to show what kind of skewed aspirations a rich man like Max has, as well as the sort of backstabbing antics the Watchers are capable of. <br>
The final scene of the season was once again one ending in tragedy. Jacob has been offered the "black box" and intends to use it to transfer Ellie out of the game. Of course, only sadism can be expected from the Watchers, who give Jacob 5 hours to kill Avery. Even though Avery had been in cahoots with Max to throw Jacob deeper into the game, we find out that she had lost her husband and baby son to the game previously, and her feelings for Jacob are genuine, so as a Javery shipper, it was a soul-shattering moment to see Avery settle on sacrificing herself to save Ellie and Jacob telling her "You are the first good thing to happen to me in a long time" before he strangles her, thereby signalling the end of season 3. <br>
Not many people have heard of <i>Chosen</i> before because it's a low budget series only aired on Crackle's website, but it's gaining enough momentum to be renewed for season 4 with a setup revamped to have 10 hour long episodes, as opposed to the six 20-minute ones per season originally. I'm not sure what this increased popularity says about the viewers, including myself, getting hooked on a murder show, though I'm mostly still on the ride to see some justice served to the Watchers, who definitely deserve a taste of their own medicine at this point. 
