---
layout: post
title:  "How Jane Eyre Helps Feminism"
date:   2015-07-10 
categories: misc
---
After reading romance novel after romance novel with a female protagonist described as one of the many variations of beauty and a corresponding male love interest of equal physical attractiveness, I came to the conclusion that of course they end up together! It is very easy to love beautiful things, that which have been blessed to naturally please. Even in movies, God forbid the casting director allows anything less than a model-esque thespian to appear in any scene, unless of course having an unattractive character is essential to the story. This, however, is the case in the story of Jane Eyre, but even then, in Fukunaga's 2011 adaptation of the classic, Mia Wasikowska as the titular protagonist and Michael Fassbender as her counterpart lover aren't exactly a repugnant couple to behold in terms of looks. </br>
</br>
Still, I appreciate Charlotte Bronte's sentiments. A happy denouement for a purportedly ugly set of people -- after all they found each other attractive in some way -- is what people who sometimes feel insecure about their looks (ahem, me) need to be assured that they will not have to resort to lifelong companionship of the animal variety as they still have a chance at the human variety. Nevertheless, if we are comparing tragedies between the sexes in </i>Jane Eyre</i>, I'd say Jane got the shorter end of the stick. Back in 18th century England, the patriarchy was running at its peak, with women being at no greater disadvantage. </br>
</br>
Attributed to be "poor and plain", Jane hardly had a happy childhood, living with her hostile aunt and cousins after being orphaned. Sent to the strictest of schools meant to reform her apparently abhorrent nature, Jane lost a dear schoolmate to sickness. It was only through her own grit that Jane was able to hone the skills necessary to become a worthy governess and make a living for herself. Mr. Rochester, on the other hand, lived quite comfortably due to being relatively wealthy despite not being too fortunate in his countenance. Though he was tricked into marrying a mentally unstable bride, he had the resources to keep his married status a secret from general society so that he was still able to behave as if he were an eligible bachelor, ripe for the picking. </br>
</br>
Although, when it comes down to it, the fact that Jane and Mr. Rochester end up together because they genuinely love each other makes my heart sing, because they are able to look beyond each other's face value for something deeper. I imagine being attractive isn't without a cost, since you are stuck with superficiality most of the time. Actress Hedy Lamarr became </i>bored</i> with the glory of fame and went on to invent improvements to radio communications. Though she desired to be recognised more for her brains than her beauty, the public still viewed her as a celebrity over a scientist. (Though of course, this isn't the world's worst worry to have.) </br>
</br>
So in conclusion, ugly men and ugly women alike can find true love, so thank you, Charlotte Bronte, for giving hope to and shedding light on ugly people, who especially need love due to the bias inevitably experienced as a result of being outcompeted by better-looking peers. It is only fair that after so long, the stories of ugly people are revealed to give a more balanced account of human experience. 