---
layout: post
title:  "Why Whiplash Scared Me"
date:   2015-05-11
categories: misc
---
WARNING: Spoilers ahead! If you have not yet seen the film <i>Whiplash </i>, DO NOT READ ANY FURTHER! ...Unless you don't plan to. <br>
<br>
Recently, I watched the Academy Award-winning drama film <i>Whiplash</i>, and I realised how quickly sucked in I was. Apart from the reason that I had a stint wanting to be one of the world's pioneering lady drummers, I was originally drawn to the film after viewing its trailer, thinking it would be about cutthroat competitive drumming and striving to be the best drummer with the aid of an overly pushy instructor. <br>
By the time the credits rolled in, however, a wave of shock and terror hit me. What I had just witnessed was not the journey of a youth aspiring to be one of the best drummers in the music realm, but the progression of an emotionally abusive relationship happening in broad daylight under the cover of "the desire to help someone reach excellence". <br>
An emotionally abusive relationship is all about power and control. The abuser needs to constantly maintain authority over the victim to the point that the victim forgets he can actually just walk out of there. The abuser must make the victim believe that his word is golden and his way is the only one. <br>
Notice how in what is supposedly the best music school in the country, there is only ONE instructor -- Fletcher -- under scrutiny. While there is a scene in which another instructor is present, this one's role is quickly deemed irrelevant and subordinate, as Fletcher enters the practice room without knocking, and his mere presence causes the students to reach instant silence and the instructor to step aside without protest. <br>
In reality, Fletcher has no more power than any of the other instructors. It is not shown whether he has gained more awards or is better-skilled at teaching in comparison to the others. It is simply the way he commands the room, the way he presents himself as an authority figure, that leads all around him to believe he is powerful. Of course, as an instructor at a prestigious institution, he does have some level of authority over the students, but he exercises it in ways that are unnecessary, as if to show off just because he can. <br>
Fletcher tells Andrew to come to his practice room at 6 AM. At first, I thought that making Andrew get up early was some method of discipline, but as he sits there wearily staring at the clock and wondering if Fletcher will appear in the next moment, it gradually becomes apparent that either Fletcher mistakenly told Andrew a wrong time, or <i>he did it on purpose</i>. It turns out that band practice does not begin until a whole 3 hours later. A normal person would want to address this mishap as soon as possible, considering how one slip of the tongue caused three wasted hours, but Fletcher's entrance into the room gives no chance for that. <br>
Fletcher swoops into the room right as the clock strikes nine, and as if on cue, all the students cease their chatter and rise to greet Fletcher with their heads hung low, eyes on the ground. These submissive stances unmistakably indicate that Fletcher has orchestrated complete control and created for himself a high status position that everyone fears. He begins to conduct a piece and all is well for about five seconds until abruptly, he signals for the music to stop, claiming that somebody is playing out of tune. This start-stop regime goes on a couple more times as Fletcher gives the culprit several chances to own up. Nobody does. <br>
Finally, Fletcher calls out a random student and demands that the latter identify whether or not he was on or off pitch. The pure pressure of Fletcher's unrelenting glare is enough to make the student doubt himself and whimper out that he was off pitch, resulting in his dismissal as a member of the band. Fletcher then reveals that he knew it was someone else all along, but that the student's hesitation was bad enough to qualify for expulsion from the band. The real perpetrator is not punished. Clearly, Fletcher used something as arbitrary as a student's faith in his own musical abilities as grounds to make membership decisions, rather than a student's <i>actual</i> musical abilities, as part of his ploy to demonstrate the power he holds. Following this, it is no wonder then that Andrew didn't even bother to bring up the grievance Fletcher had inflicted upon him earlier, knowing now that he could just as easily be kicked out from the band on the basis of any of Fletcher's whims. <br>
An abuser such as Fletcher keeps the victim in the vicious cycle by confusing the latter. Fletcher appears to be supportive of Andrew in the beginning by pretending to care about family details, but really, he is collecting the very darts that he will later throw at Andrew. In one scene, Andrew secretly observes Fletcher having a friendly conversation with a former student and his young daughter, giving him the impression that Fletcher also has a soft and sweet side, but this is precisely the illusion that Fletcher needs to keep Andrew hooked. Andrew needs to believe that no matter how immensely hurtful the insults that Fletcher barks at him are, they are for his own good and they "represent" how much Fletcher cares about him. <br>
But if Fletcher was truly concerned about Andrew's wellbeing, he failed to show it in a crucial moment -- when Andrew stumbled onto stage with visible injuries from his car accident just minutes before. To add insult to injury, after Andrew plays a few subpar measures of drumming, due to his obviously painful wounds, Fletcher informs him that he is out of the band, to which Andrew responds by tackling Fletcher to the ground in a fit of rage. <br>
Another note about the car accident is that it is unquestionable evidence of what happens to the victim as the abuser garners more and more control over him. Being in an abusive relationship requires a lot of the victim's time and energy. The abuser needs to almost brainwash the victim into a narrow line of thought so that every conscious experience of the victim only runs within the confines dictated by the abuser. Notice how Andrew has no friends and feels no remorse over breaking it off with the girl he was dating if it meant he could then devote all his time to drumming. He doesn't do any other activities. He is wholly obsessed with drumming, and more specifically, drumming until Fletcher finally expresses approval. This one-track mentality hits a peak when Andrew rushes back to the rental car to retrieve his sticks, and, on his way back to the performance venue, is hit by a truck. With drumming dominating his mind, Andrew completely disregards his injuries after crawling out of the flipped over car and dashes in the direction of the venue to the objections of the truck driver, who seems highly distressed over Andrew's unusual ignorance of his injuries. <br>
Even after being expelled from the music school for attacking Fletcher, Andrew is pulled back into Fletcher's schemes. It turns out that Fletcher had had another victim previously -- a student named Sean who developed anxiety and depression as a consequence of Fletcher's treatment toward him, driving him to commit suicide. Sean's parents took legal action against Fletcher, and their lawyer convinces Andrew to testify against Fletcher, resulting in Fletcher's discharge from his position. After such a traumatic experience, you would expect Andrew to cut any trace of Fletcher out from hereon out, but as he is strolling the streets one day, he catches sight of Fletcher's name advertised on a bar's program board. Intrigued, Andrew goes in to watch Fletcher perform and is just about to leave when the song ends, but Fletcher spots him and invites him for a drink. Personally, I expected some form of reconciliation to occur during their chat, but all Fletcher does is reaffirm his actions and his philosophy on how to train students. Andrew, in fact, appears to agree with Fletcher. Worse still, when Fletcher offers him a drumming position in his new jazz band, Andrew, against all common sense and good judgment, takes him on. <br>
It soons becomes clear that Fletcher has not changed a bit, and neither has Andrew. As the band prepares to begin the first piece, played out in front of renowned talent scouts, Fletcher instructs the band to take out the sheet music for a piece unfamiliar to Andrew. As Andrew looks around frantically, Fletcher approaches him and mutters, "You think I'm fucking stupid? I knew it was you." Suddenly, what had seemed like a peace offering unveils itself as just another one of Fletcher's tricks to control Andrew in their ongoing emotionally abusive relationship. This is how Fletcher takes revenge on Andrew for daring to challenge him by helping to remove him from his teaching position at the music school. After a miserable struggle entirely improvising through the first piece, Andrew rushes off stage in shame right into the arms of his caring father, who comforts him. This was the moment that I thought Andrew would finally break away from Fletcher's grasp, finally realise that it was time to LET IT GO and WALK AWAY, but what does Andrew do? He runs right back in. <br>
Andrew feels the need to prove himself to everybody there