---
layout: post
title:  "Feels from the Flash Finale"
date:   2015-05-20 
categories: misc
---
I used to think people who were superhero fans were nerds. I am now in the initial stages of becoming one of said nerds. Speaking of nerds, I suppose everybody is a nerd about something. "Nerd" is increasingly in possession of positive associations, particularly apparent in its movement toward becoming a substitute for "passion". <br>
That being said, I shall now proceed to full-fledged fangirling over the season 1 finale of the CW's <i>The Flash</i>. BEWARE: INCOMING SPOILERS! Do not read any further if you intend on experiencing the full intensity of this episode!<br>
<br>
Last summer, I became quite excited when I heard that one of the diabolical yet talented villains on Fox Network's <i>Glee </i> played by Grant Gustin would do a 180 twist to become the starring hero on the CW's <i>The Flash</i>. After watching the 5-6 minute long promotional video, I was very intrigued to learn the story of one Barry Allen, a name at which I scoffed at first and now 4 syllables I was eager to hear every Tuesday night as Barry narrated his backstory in the opening scene of every episode. <br>
<br>
I would like to congratulate the producers of the show on their ability to deliver an astounding season finale. We all know finales are incredibly tricky to orchestrate and that this particular episode is always an open playing field for critics. Since time travel is a major part of the series, I worried how the producers would be able to make it through without tripping over their own loopholes, and indeed, the issue of time paradoxes is left in the balance as part of the exiting cliffhanger. <br>
<br>
There are a few highlights of the episode I would love to relive here. Man is this show a master at drawing out every iota of my feels. <br>
1. Barry's split second decision NOT to save his mother. Well, I'll be damned. Not only does Barry get to hear his mother's dying scream, he also risks the stability of the space-time continuum on which the entire world as it is depends. Seriously, the look of pure pain on Barry's face, as he chose to preserve the current universe over an alternate life having both parents growing up, justified the relentless agnonising that took up the majority of the episode earlier on. Damn! I did not see that one coming. I thought it was all agreed that Barry would save his mother, Eobard Thawne would return to his time, there would be no more imposter Dr. Wells until the future arrived, and it would be happily every after...for now. I think Eobard was just as surprised as I was about Barry's change of plans, and not just a little furious, if you didn't catch it in his wrath-wrapped rant to first kill Barry and then everybody else there. At the end of the day, however, Barry had the chance to bid farewell to his mother face to face in a truly heartbreaking scene before she passed. <br>
2. Eddie's (probably also split second) decision to shoot himself in order to wipe Eobard Thawne off the board of existence, thereby damaging the already fragile space-time continuum enough to create a singularity that puts the entire world in danger anyway. Oh, the things people do for love! I don't suppose it ever occurred to hero wannabe Eddie that even if Iris was safe from Eobard's murderous rampage at the time, the time wouldn't be the same regardless since Eobard's nonexistence would mean The Flash's nonexistence, which would make that moment in time in which all of them were obsolete. The producers sure are going to have a hell of a time putting the universe back in order for next season. Still, that is exactly why I myself am going to have a hell of a time waiting for the series' return in fall. <br>
<br>
Another <i>Glee</i> star, Melissa Benoist, will join the TV superhero collection as Supergirl, in a series I suspect is aimed more toward female viewers with its rom-com take on what it's like to finally embrace your superpowers after attempting to live a normal life for so long. Nevertheless, because of the good impression of superhero shows I've had so far, I won't let that part hold me back. (After coming to the conclusion that rom-coms were giving me misleading representations of love, I was subsequently outraged and thus began to avoid them like the plague, but a superhero twist is just too juicy to pass up.)  
